[Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q7sxTnWeQ8s]

In 1925, full of hope after the success of his country's revolution five years earlier, Mexican writer José Vasconcelos proposed a speculative model for the future in which racism would supposedly be solved. Arguing against the white supremacist anti-race mixing beliefs that were dominant in the neighboring USA and among his country's own Spanish-descended elites, he said that the ideal human was actually not to be found in any one race, but rather in a fusion of them all. According to him, Whites, Blacks, Asians, Amerindians, etc. all had their own unique positive traits that the others lacked, so they were each but a shadow of what could be created, if everyone just stopped being so racist and just mixed together to create a new race infused with the very best of everyone. He called this prospect the Final Race, the Cosmic Race. Many of Vasconcelos's contemporaries were eugenicists, who were adamant that white people were superior and therefore needed to avoid mixing with the supposedly inferior races in order to preserve their superiority, but he turned this notion on its head using his opponents' own ideas about selective human breeding against them to argue for the complete opposite. Vasconcelos was quite progressive for his time. He clearly despised racism and was thinking deeply about how it might be ended, but his work nonetheless had one huge fatal flaw. He completely accepted the concept of race as valid, never questioning it, never asking how and why such a notion had even come about in the first place. Rather he took the idea that humans could and should be divided into racial categories such as White and Black for granted. This led him to a conclusion that still very much operated by that same exact logic - 'races exist, they all have their own special traits, and therefore they should all merge into one race to take advantage of that'. And many well-meaning people today still think quite similarly, just maybe not in the terms of proposed solution (though it sounds like a good time), rather like Vasconcelos they take for granted that race is just kind of an irrevocable truth, a common sense sort of thing that just is. Maybe you're one of them. But since Vasconcelos's time an abundance of historical, scientific and sociological research has shown definitively that race is a social construct. What that means is that the categorization of people into immutable races based mostly on arbitrary superficial physical characteristics, especially facial features and skin color is not an objectively existing fact of life, nor is it more scientifically valid than other methods of grouping human beings. Rather it's something that was only developed and thought of importance by people. So, while we could, for example, say with reasonable scientific certainty that the giant space rock that we call Earth is a thing that would exist regardless of whether we thought so or not, the same couldn't be said for race. Basically, it's all in our heads. That doesn't mean that it's not real though. Money, for example, is also a social construct. Without the complex array of social systems that afford it value, it's nothing but some pieces of paper and metal or a number on your screen. Yet good luck arguing yourself out of a huge debt on that basis in a socially constructed court before a judge with the socially constructed power to order the socially constructed police force to take you away into the socially constructed prison system. Probably not going to end very well. Point is - that humans invented race doesn't mean that it doesn't have a tangible, pervasive effect in the real world. And to the countless people throughout history and the many billions today who are still very much affected by it, it no doubt seems very, very real. Some social constructs are better or more sensical than others however. And it's safe to say that race with all the abominably awful stuff done in its name hasn't been a particularly good one. If I could give it review, I'd give it a zero. Zero out of ten. But then how did it become such a prominent concept despite all of that? How did many of our societies come to put so much importance onto something that - if what I'm saying here is true - it would seem very illogical for us to really care much about it at all. The answer is that it's because race and racism were invented very deliberately and then propagated by powerful people who had a very specific goal in mind - to legally and morally, at least to them, justify the hereditary lifelong slavery of Black Africans and to prevent potential challenges to the perpetuation of this practice. It was all little more than a fiction created post hoc by people who already owned African slaves who wanted to solidify their economic, social and political power. Everything else that followed from there such as the invention of other racial categories beyond Black and White and their ordering on the hierarchy of supposed innate superiority was built on this initial foundation. And race's continued importance today is a part of that chain too, stemming from those same beginnings and subsequent developments. So, in this video I'm gonna go over the history and explain just how and why in detail race was initially invented. It's very interesting and revealing. At times the process was so blatant that we can trace important parts of its development right down to specific historical documents. In 1500 a Christian Western European would've primarily identified along religious, national or regional lines, definitely not racial ones. 300 years later in 1800 that same person's descendants now in the Americas would be very likely to add a new identifier into that mix that linked them to other Europeans based on the idea that they all innately had something common with one another - White. How'd that happen? Let's find out! The invention of the race occurred primarily in the colonial Americas through the development of the opposing categories - Black and White. Beforehand, while such terms had been used on occasion, they were convenient descriptions of immediately obvious physical differences rather than references to an actual racial framework. For example, there's a big difference between thinking "relative to me, this guy has black colored skin and nothing more than that" and thinking "relative to me, this guy has black colored skin, ergo he is a part of the unified black race and shares certain innate characteristics with other members of this black race". The first example there doesn't necessarily imply any sort of racial thinking while the second very clearly does. And the latter is the sort of thing that we're talking about here. The invention of race was a bit of a team effort, primarily involving the Spanish, Portuguese and English (later British) empires. The Spanish - the first Europeans to colonize the Americas and import African slaves there - developed the concept of racial blackness in order to justify said slavery. And later when the English started colonizing the Americas too, they picked the enslavement of Africans and the idea of racial blackness up from the Spanish. It was them who then took things to the next level, inventing the concept of racial whiteness to more clearly define who was and wasn't a slave. So, because of that this video will be divided into three parts - "How blackness was invented", "How whiteness was invented" and "The conclusion". Let's start now at the beginning.

[Part 1. The Spanish invention of the racial blackness and racial slavery]

The Spanish, over the course of about a hundred years, codified and spread the concept of racial blackness to justify the mass slavery of Africans in the Americas. Slavery was, of course, nothing new. It had been practiced all across the world millennia beforehand. Most relevant for us though are the European and Arab precedents. Both had long established and interlinked practices of non-racialized slavery which saw people of all ethnicities and all skin complexions enslaved, often alongside one another. This slavery was justified by its proponents on religious grounds. Muslims could only enslave non-Muslims and Christians only non-Christians. Thus, at least according to religious law, which was quite dominant at the time, conversion was the route out of slavery. The situation in the New World, where one specific physically, rather than religiously, defined group were assumed to be slaves by the default with special rules applying only to them, was quite different. There even Christian Africans could be subjected to permanent hereditary bondage. So we need to go over how this radical shift in the already abhorrent practice of slavery came about. How darkest skin Central and West Africans came to be considered by the Spanish, both legally and socially, to be part of a unified black race, which, according to them, was also something of a natural slave race, an even lower class of slave than the slaves that had come before them. There are two very important interlinked developments which helped the Spanish to their legal and moral justifications for this. The development of anti-black proto-racism in the Muslim world and widespread antisemitism among Iberian Christians that led them to develop ideas of innate hereditary inferiority that they would later apply to Black Africans. The Spanish absorbed a sort of primitive, underdeveloped concept of racial blackness through cultural exchange with the Muslim world which they were also a part of. From the 8th century to the late 15th century large parts of Spain were under Muslim rule. This was a time of relative religious tolerance and intermingling between Muslims, Christians and Jews. For the time period the Islamic rulers of the Iberian peninsula were fairly ambivalent towards the practice of other Abrahamic religions. Nonetheless, the Muslims were the ones who were in charge and their culture was therefore mostly dominant for many generations. So, their ideas and practices filtered through to their Christian and Jewish subjects both directly and indirectly. At its height, Muslim rule extended from the northernmost areas of modern day Portugal and Spain down to the furthest reaches of northern Africa and east from there all the way to Pakistan. It was these Muslim empires, kingdoms and caliphates that were in the position of economic power and hegemony that allowed them to nearly monopolize the trade in slaves in Africa. As they moved south of the Sahara desert, they encountered an abundance of darker-skinned African pagans who subsequently came under their rule. Since they were not People of the Book who were under the protection of a Muslim ruler, they were ineligible for the legal protections that were afforded to Christians and Jews in the Iberian peninsula. Thus they could be legally enslaved. Millions of Africans were therefore enslaved in this way over the many centuries of the Muslim hegemony. While they were, as mentioned earlier, enslaved alongside people of all appearances and origins, these black slaves, as they eventually came to be called, were the most numerous of them all and were exported across the Muslim world at the time. Including to present-day Spain and Portugal where Jewish and Christian Iberians also joined in on enslaving them and employed very similar religious justifications for doing so. The legal justifications that were used during this era of slavery were religious and remained so throughout. But the pure abundance of African slaves who had visibly darker skin relative to others in these societies over time resulted in them being seen as a sort of distinct group, one that was supposedly inferior for reasons that went beyond just them not being religious believers. They came to be considered even lower than other slaves and so the hardest and most degrading forms of labor were reserved for them. It's important to clarify here that the racial sense of the term "black" wasn't actually yet in anything resembling wide use during this period. But, still, large numbers of relatively darker-skinned people being forced to do what were considered the absolute worst forms of labor led to the word "slave" itself being associated solely with Black people in certain parts of the Muslim world. By the 14th century the word "black", while still not quite being officially nor very widely, was now being used negatively by some writers in North Africa and the Iberian peninsula. For example, the famous Tunisian historian Ibn Khaldun wrote decades before the Spanish and Portuguese ever even arrived in Americas that "Blacks are as a whole submissive to slavery because they have little that is essentially human and have attributes that are quite similar to those of dumb animals". Passages like these are practically identical to those that would soon be used to justify Black slavery in the colonized Americas for many centuries. It is thus from their 800-year long integration into the Muslim world that the Iberian Christians who invaded the Americas consciously or not picked up the idea that the people who they would come to generalize as Black were innately inferior. There are however two very important caveats here. One - this development had very little to do with Islam itself and more to do with the position of hegemonic power that the Islamic world held during this period. There's no reason to believe that Christians or Jews in the same position wouldn't have done the same since their own laws regarding slavery were practically identical. And, as I'll be going over soon, the Spanish and Portuguese Christians, once they did take over, turned out to be much less tolerant of other religions than the Muslim rulers had been and created even harsher rules and conditions specifically regarding Black slavery. And two - this early anti-Black sentiment was never actually accepted across the Islamic world not socially nor officially. It was a niche informal idea rather than anything resembling a state or religious ideology. Islamic religious leaders and jurists went to pains to argue that all Muslims were equal and that there was no such thing as a natural slave. During their 800-year long period of dominance Muslims never created any slavery laws that applied specifically to Black Africans. Still, it's practically certain that at least some slave owners did ignore the law and refused to release slaves who had converted to Islam by appealing to this early form of anti-Black proto-racism. A chilling sign of what was to come later in the Americas. Thus the concept of racial blackness had its first roots in the desire to justify slavery by dehumanizing slaves. However, as historian David Bryan Davis noted, Muslims did not develop nor practice the kind of systemic racial oppression that later appeared in White South Africa and most of the New World. The most important innovation of the Spanish to the long-standing practice of Black African slavery was that they took this pre-existing informal idea of an innate racial blackness which was fairly uncommon and mostly held by slave-owning elites themselves and spread it far wider. In contrast with the Islamic theologians and jurists who had rejected any notion of doing so they turned it into actual formal law, an official ideology and a truly systemic form of racial oppression. The other big contributing factor was antisemitism combined with its associated legal religious discrimination. In the mid-1400s, Spanish authorities in areas that were independent of Muslim rule began enacting statutes on 'limpiesa de sangre' or 'purity of blood' in English - a system of legal discrimination based on religion. After the reconquista was completed in 1492 with almost the entire Iberian peninsula under Christian rule for the first time in many centuries, these laws were quickly expanded massively almost everywhere across the region. The many Jews and Muslims who had stayed in their homes and who were thus now living under Christian rule were suddenly legally considered to be impure. And due to this they were excluded from professional occupations such as medicine, from administrative positions, from being able to go to university, and from many other things. They were also subject to pervasive social discrimination as a result. In stark contrast to the relative interfaith tolerance that characterized Muslim rule. But these purity of blood laws did not simply apply to people who were currently Jews or Muslims, they also applied to anyone with traceable Muslim or Jewish ancestors. Spanish Christians had already been engaging in mass forced conversions, especially of Jews, since at least the 14th century. And now with their much more complete control over the peninsula they were able to force conversions onto many more Muslims and Jews. To keep these so-called New Christians as a legal underclass despite their conversions, the blood purity laws were created and spread. There was also a sort of conspiracy theory that motivated this. Muslims and especially Jews in Christian-controlled parts of Spain had long been considered as something of an internal enemy who were always scheming against Christendom. Now that many of them had converted to be Christians themselves, they were seen as something even more nefarious. Now the idea was that they had, like, successfully infiltrated Christianity and were plotting to destroy it from within. So, now each of them was seen as, like, a potential false converts who were still secretly practicing their old religion in private and who was just waiting for the right moment, possibly across generations, to stab their so-called Old Christian neighbours in the back. This led to the widespread conception that would also become a crucial part of anti-Black racism in the future. That Jewishness and Muslimness were not just religious beliefs but rather immutable negative traits carried in the blood which could never be overcome. Descendants of Jews in particular were especially victimized over this notion. The system of "limpiesta de sangre" was then exported to the Americas once colonization there began. First as an informal continuation of the social norms in peninsular Spanish society and later as actual formal law. This was thus the other piece of the initial puzzle. Ideas of hereditary immutable inferiority were already widespread and even codified into law. The Spanish would then combine this with aforementioned anti-Black proto-racism to justify slavery in a way that would lead to the concept of racial blackness. Thereafter opening up the Pandora's Box of modern style racial thought. Now, with the precedent established, we can move on further in the development. Once they arrived in the Americas, the Spanish began encountering different groups of indigenous people and, after conquering them by force, they needed to integrate them into their socioeconomic hierarchy and this meant applying their already existing religious laws to them. Initially, the first colony founded by Christopher Columbus immediately subjected indigenous people to mass slavery, treating them as human only when convenient. But concerns regarding the religious legality of this practice led to reforms. Indians, as the Spanish called them, were declared by a series of royal and church decrees to be pure of blood provided that they agreed to convert. The logic behind this was that they'd never heard of the Christian God and thus they couldn't be blamed for their non-belief. This change was made for two reasons. First, in order to incentivize surrender and voluntary submission to Spanish rule, since the Spanish had found that Indians were much more willing to fight to the death and make them pay dearly for their attempted conquest if slavery was the only fate that awaited them. And second, because the Spanish royals and religious authorities were genuinely concerned with the potential religious consequences of enslaving Indians. If they'd gotten the decision wrong, they believed that they could potentially go to hell for it. So, after years of debate those who argued for the humanity and religious purity of Indians, won out and, at least formally, it was decided that they could only be enslaved if they refused to become Christians. In practice these laws were often not enforced at all or the Spanish conquistadors would use loopholes to get around them. One common means through which they did this was to upon first contact with a new group of indigenous people read off a document called the Requirement which demanded that they immediately convert to Christianity. However this was done in Spanish which the natives obviously did not understand. When they inevitably failed to comply with these demands that was used as a justification to immediately violently attack them and enslave the survivors who had now, according to a literal reading of Spanish law, rejected Christ and could therefore be legally enslaved. Still, at least formally at this early stage, outright Indian slavery was common but still not quite the norm and the Spanish didn't yet look at the native peoples of the Americas in terms of race. Rather they were conceived of as members of the so-called Republic of Indians. This was juxtaposed with the term that the Spanish used for their rule of the Americas - the Republic of Spaniards. This distinction was clearly based on an idea of nationality and culture rather than something racial. Like, for example, if they had instead named their side the Republic of Whites. Indigenous people were definitely considered to be inferior but this was not quite yet due to widespread ideas of innate hereditary biological inferiority. Rather, their purported inferiority was due to their status as people who had been forced into submitting to the Catholic monarchs and who were as a result legally discriminated against, forced to pay tributes and provide quotas of forced labor to the Spanish. This was combined with prejudices against their supposedly inferior culture. Since Indians were not considered to have impure blood the child of an Indian and a Spaniard could theoretically become civilized, at least eventually, and be integrated into the Republic of Spaniards. Ideas of innate hereditary sort of inferiority were therefore at least not quite official at this early point in time. Racial thinking surrounding Indians would gradually become more hegemonic later on, especially during the 1600s, but this was largely a consequence of the expansion of the racist framework that was initially developed in order to discriminate against Black slaves. I need to take a second here to discuss the famous "Casta" paintings of the 18th and 19th centuries. You might have seen them before. Some historians over-interpreted the significance of these paintings, leading them to believe that the Spanish colonial system operated with a frankly ridiculously convoluted system of race-based hierarchy which described every single possible racial mixture and discriminated against each to varying degrees. However in reality these paintings were mere art pieces commissioned by elites who were obsessed with race rather than being indicative of real actually existing social or legal hierarchies. This becomes much more obvious when we look closely. In the most famous "Casta" painting the 15th category is literally just called "I don't understand you", making it clear that the work probably wasn't meant to be taken very seriously in the first place. Some of the terms in the paintings were used often such as "Mulato" to describe the child of a Black and Spanish couple or "Mestizo" to describe the child of an Indian and Spanish couple. The point here is that there was not really much of an official caste system based on such a massive plethora of categories describing every single possible degree of racial mixture. There definitely was an actual caste system in the Spanish Americas but in practice it was much simpler. The most important categories were Spanish, usually meaning European or at least someone who was mixed race between European and Indian who was legitimized by the Spanish side of their family, was culturally Spanish and who lived among Spaniards. There were very, very isolated exceptions early on but a social understanding developed over time whereby the term became associated with light skin and with racial whiteness. We'll be covering that more in depth later on. "Mestizo" meaning people who were mixed race European Indians who were not accepted as being full Spaniards but who usually lived among them nonetheless. Indian meaning anyone with Indian ancestors who was culturally Indian and lived among them. And Black meaning anyone with Black African ancestry. While different terminology was used to refer to Black people based on their degree of Black ancestry such as the words "casta" and "Mulatto" all were subject to very similar legal and social oppression because they were nonetheless considered to be impure. Of these categories Black was the only one which was considered to taint the blood of a union with members of the others. So the children of at least one parent with known African ancestry were legally condemned to a life of pervasive discrimination. This was true all the way up until the very end of Spanish imperial rule. I'll now explain how this actually came about, a process which was completely irrevocably linked with slavery and the previously mentioned antecedents. After the laws that declared that Indians were in effect Old Christians and which therefore technically outlawed Indian slavery were passed, Spanish authorities went scrambling looking for a replacement as actually paying their workers was a thing that they really, really didn't want to do. Influenced by the recent entry into the African slave trade of their Portuguese neighbors, they settled on the long-established practice of Black African slavery. Throughout the 16th century even those who were staunch advocates for the humanity of indigenous Americans, who fought valiantly against the abuses wrought against them by the Spanish colonial system, rarely if ever afforded the same level of humanitarian zeal to enslaved Black Africans. The most prominent example is Bartolomé de las Casas, a prominent Spanish priest. His arguments were instrumental in convincing the Catholic Church and the Spanish monarchs to pass the aforementioned reforms directed at elevating the legal status of Indians. It's not an exaggeration to say that without him Spanish colonization could have been even more brutal than it already was. Yet even he in 1518 argued that Indian slaves should just be replaced with African ones and he saw absolutely no issue with doing so at the time. The consensus was now universal and the Blacks, as they were now being called, had practically no advocates. Las Casas about a decade later repudiated his stance. He argued that he'd been misled into believing that the Africans who were kidnapped into slavery by the Portuguese, from whom Spain was buying most of their slaves in this early period, had been captured in so-called "just wars" and had been offered the chance to convert to Christianity but had refused. He was still using the classic religious justification for slavery and applying it equally regardless of race but the damage had by then already been done. Black slaves were being imported into the Spanish Americas en mass and set in stone social and legal justifications for enslaving Africans were developing. As a consequence the racist conception of blackness was spreading and the Spanish were already looking upon African slaves as subhuman unfit for anything more than forced labor for life. But de las Casas, when he changed his mind on African slavery had raised a very good point, one which was taken seriously by his contemporaries - there was no basis under established law, not Jewish, not Christian and not Muslim, for the unconditional permanent enslavement of Black Africans, regardless of how inferior they supposedly were or weren't. If they were Christians or had converted to Christianity the law was clear that they were to be freed. And additionally, most of them had, just like the Indians, never heard of Christ before European contact and thus should not have been able to be condemned for their disbelief. Logically they should have been considered pure of blood and therefore equal to Old Christians just as Indians had been. Thus de las Casas argued that the tens of thousands or perhaps even hundreds of thousands of African slaves who had at that early point already been shipped to the Americas were actually illegally enslaved even under the completely [ __ ] up and barbarous laws of the Spanish empire in the 16th century. And he was entirely correct. This was a big problem for the Spanish monarchs, their church authorities and the slave owners who all wanted to legally secure the continued practice of mass African slavery. So they did some mental gymnastics in order to codify specific rules that would only apply to black Africans and their descendants. They looked towards the biblical Curse of Ham which is really a curse on his son Canaan. In the Bible, Noah curses Canaan to punish his father because he gazed upon Noah's nakedness. When Noah finds out this happened he's said to have raged. "Cursed be Canaan! The lowest of slaves he will be to his brothers." So, for the unforgivable, unspeakable crime that his dad committed, of looking at a dick, Noah cursed Canaan with being the lowest of the slaves, destined to be in servitude to the rest of God's children. This passage is very clearly ripe for interpretation and interpreted it was. Jewish, Muslim and Christian theologians all ask the same questions. Does that mean that Canaan's descendants also carry that same curse? If so who are they? And since the bible says that Canaan should be a slave to his brothers and the rest of humanity are supposedly mostly descended from said brothers then wouldn't that give the rest of god's children, aka us, the right to enslave his descendants no matter what. The bible is unclear about just who Ham and Canaan's descendants would be in the present day and makes no references specifically to, like, a racial skin color like black or white and that leaves it open to even more interpretation. It could theoretically with sufficient mental gymnastics be used to legitimize the slavery of nearly anyone, and so it was, now that I put it that way, seemingly kind of inevitably applied to Black Africans. The earliest record of that use comes from the 1100s when a Jewish writer living in the Muslim world noted that some say that the Blacks are slaves because of Noah's curse on Ham. This time there were none of the practical concerns that had partly motivated the Spanish to raise the legal status of Indians. And the fear of eternal damnation to hell for unjustly enslaving Christians or potential Christians was sated by this Biblical justification. So they drew upon this established precedent of claiming that Black Africans were cursed by Noah to be eternal slaves and therefore obviously could never be true Christians, right? By this perverse logic, religious laws that exempted Christians from slavery would not apply to them which made them permanent hereditary slaves. Conversion no longer had any potential to free them. The only legal path to liberation for a Black African slave in the Spanish colonies would be voluntary release by their master. And even then they would still face pervasive legal discrimination. Thus in the early 1600s advocacy from the Mexican branch of the Catholic Church convinced the immensely powerful Spanish inquisition to mark Black Africans as impure, utilizing the already existing blood purity system to turn informal ideas of innate racial blackness and the supposed inferiority of Black Africans into official ideology. Unlike the descendants of Jews and Muslims, however, they were not considered impure due to the religious beliefs of their ancestors but simply due to the linkage of skin color, facial features and, like that, type of hair - with a biblical myth. This official association of an innate insurmountable hereditary inferiority with superficial physical features for all intents and purposes completed the invention of the Black race - a concept that was evidently created by slave societies in order to secure the practice of Black African slavery. The actual broader systemic framework of race, however, encompassing more than just like one or two groups of people was yet to be invented. That development would come soon afterwards through the invention of the White race and whiteness. In contrast to the concept of racial blackness invented in order to condemn a specific group of people to an insurmountable place at the very bottom of the social hierarchy, racial whiteness came about as a way to more clearly define just who was at the top. This first happened in the context of another colonial American society where differing circumstances gave it much more utility.

[Next chapter]

When the English began colonizing the Americas in the late 16th and early 17th centuries, they quickly took up the already entrenched Spanish and Portuguese practice of African slavery and with it they inherited the idea of racial blackness. However, the English legal system was different to the Spanish one. While it involved plenty of religious discrimination, the power of its church was not as pronounced and it lacked something like the Spanish blood purity laws to draw upon. The English colony on the Caribbean island of Barbados, founded in 1627, quickly took to establishing its own laws regarding slavery. The first of these, passed by the governing Barbados council in 1636, decreed that Negroes and Indians that came here to be sold, should serve for life, unless a Contract was before made to the contrary. There was no actual definition given as to what constituted a Negro or an Indian, making it clear that these categories established by the Spanish were already taken to be self-evident. Note that the second part there regarding contracts was only intended to apply to Indian indentured servants, limited number of whom were transported to Barbados. There is no evidence that any Black person in Barbados was ever an indentured servant rather than a slave. Another implication is that European people could not be enslaved because they were not one of the two categories listed. So the English practiced racial slavery in the Americas from the very beginning with Black people assumed to be slaves by default. Most indentured servants in Barbados were, however, actually Europeans, but indentured servitude was very different to slavery. Servants were treated with incredible cruelty just like the slaves but they nonetheless had ways out that slaves didn't. 	A slave was property for life as were their children while an indentured servant only had to serve for the duration of their contract and this wasn't hereditary. Despite these differences, slaves and indentured servants nonetheless worked alongside one another and the brutality they all suffered, engendered some camaraderie between them. Many of the European indentured servants were Irish rebels who'd been captured and forced to labor in the American colonies as punishment. They had no real understanding of race themselves, no prior knowledge of ideological hatred of black people, that was prevalent in the Americas. In fact, given that they were now being forced to work for their English enemies, they had a lot more common with the Black slaves than with their masters which was reason for them to unite and fight together and so they did. By the 1660s there had been a number of rebellions of black slaves and european servants, especially Irish ones. This potential for collaboration between these two groups terrified the English ruling class.

As historian Jenny Shaw summarized, through their refusal to conform to English expectations about their behavior, Irish Catholics and enslaved Africans alike push back against the constraints of colonial Caribbean society. Sometimes the actions they took had the power to frighten English officials, because of the religious connotations of Irish Catholics trying to subvert Protestant rule. On other occassions the threat came from Africans determined to overthrow a system that was the lifeblood of the English Caribbean and central to its success. And at other times these interests merged. Each moment of rebellion was profoundly frightening for English officials who were given physical proof of the fragile nature of the hierarchies they were trying to enforce. But for enslaved Africans and Irish Catholics the response must have been quite the opposite. They felt strength in their solidarity with one another and excitement at the power they held when they saw how panicked English authorities and settlers were. Not just about the possibility of a revolt but about one that involved a mix of races, cultures and religions acting in concert against English rule. The English rulers of Barbados took these threats very, very seriously and their response was to try to cause divisions between european servants and african slaves. So they passed a sweeping new law in 1661 that aimed to improve conditions for servants in order to disincentivize them from rebellion while simultaneously incentivizing them to help with the oppression of Black slaves. To do this they used the legal category of "Christian", which was juxtaposed with "Negro", which is just "Black" in Spanish.